In our last class we traced rays
through optical systems, and learned rules using first-order design
principles for how those rays would move, and eventually, say,
converged at the focus of a lens. There's clearly something
we did wrong there, and the focus of this second class
is to fix this mistake we made. In particular,
we had ray traces that looked like this, where all of the light came to
a focus of infinitely small size. And that must have some problem,
because if you did that, you'd create your own Big Bang, and though exciting,
is generally a poor design principle. So we must have done something wrong,
and the thing that we're going to learn in this class is that we need to
think about more than single rays. We actually have to look at
the ensemble of rays, and think about the fact
that light has a shape. And the core of this course is really
understanding the shape of light, as it moves through optical systems. And this will limit the ability to focus
light to an infinitely small point, so it's going to give us resolution in things
like imaging or lithography systems. And it's also very important in
understanding how you get light off of, let's say, a lightbulb, in through
a system, and how much light you can get, how bright it can be. It turns out, we weren't completely wrong,
there was just a region of space where these solutions that we
derived in the last class are incorrect. And we can understand that by
remembering that we derived rays from an equation called the Eikonal,
from Maxwell's equations, but we made one critical assumption as
we went through that derivation. And that was that the amplitude
of the light was slowly varying, the derivative of the amplitude
of e with space was slow. And that's generally true in
the middle of our optical systems, or outside of our optical systems. But at the edges where we're going from
this kind of designs, from no intensity to lots, to a step function at this edges,
clearly that assumption is violated. So the first thing to remember is
that in the kind of derivations and ray traces that we did last time, the
edges of all of them are a bit suspect. And of course all those edges
all come together at that focus, where we noted momentarily ago that
we had infinite energy density. That explains that our solution
using rays is invalid at that spot, and so we need to fix that. And another example of that is,
instead of having a little point radiator, an incoherent source like a little
screaming electron on a hot body, what if instead we had
something like a laser beam? This is a finite sized coherent object,
and that's going to launch a set of rays, or a set of fields, that are not coming
from an infinitesimally small point. And it turns out in that case, pretty much the entire solution that
we have going through this rays can be, if not wrong, at least not perfectly
correct and we're going to fix that. So this is a very common sort of thing
when you are imaging laser beams, or optical fibers, or
maybe we have small coherent sources, which is a very common and
important optical problem. So we need to understand how
to deal with systems now, where we think about the shape of the
laser beam, or the shape of the optics, and deal with this problem that our edges
in our previous solutions were incorrect.